#title Information security and content filtering
#keywords cf, content filtering, web filtering

More than 7 years I working in branch of information security and development of software
for content filtering.

Until the end of 2006 i worked in [[http://www.jetinfo.com][Jet Infosystems]], first as developer, and later as head
of software development group.  I worked on e-mail filtering product SMAP "Dozor Jet", and
architect and develop the web-filtering product called SKVT "Dozor Jet".  Both products
working in many big companies and government organizations in Russia, Ukraine &
Kazakhstan.

Since 2007 I'm working as Senior Developer in McAfee (former [[http://www.securecomputing.com][Secure Computing Corp.]]) on
[[http://www.securecomputing.com/index.cfm?skey=22][Secure Web]] product (old name -- Webwasher).

* Open source projects

I also working on some open source projects related to the content filtering and
information security.

 - [[http://sourceforge.net/projects/wfilter][wfilter]] -- project of creating free content filtering software for use in schools, at
   home, etc. 
 - [[http://sourceforge.net/projects/openfwtk][openfwtk]] -- application level firewall, supporting different protocols.  Very portable
   and working on different hardware and OSes.
 - [[./squid-gsbapi][squid-gsb]] -- utility, that implement support of Safe Browsing API in Squid
 - [[http://sourceforge.net/projects/dgav][dgav]] -- for of [[http://dansguardian.org/][dansguardian]] project for adding of antivirus support in it.

* Publications on information security and content filtering

 - [[../writings/cf/index][Article about modern trends in content filtering]]


;  LocalWords:  Webwasher LocalWords
