#title Clojure
#keywords clojure, lisp, common lisp, functional programming, intro into clojure, tutorial

I'm using the [[http://clojure.org][Clojure]] programming language to develop programs for JVM platform (I don't
like the Java language, as it too restrictive & too verbose).  Although Clojure is
relatively young language, but it has many interesting features, such as immutable data,
simple concurrency model & many features of Lisp, while work on JVM provides access to
numerous libraries, developed for this platform.

I'm mostly using this language to analyze numerical & textual data for information
retrieval & data mining.  In my work I use [[http://incanter.org][Incanter]] - very useful library for data
analysis, numerical calculation, etc.

** Where to find information about Clojure

Main source of information about this language is [[http://clojure.org][language's site]] and [[http://groups.google.com/group/clojure][mailing list]].
Another useful source of information is [[http://planet.clojure.in][Planet Clojure]] -- blogs aggregator.  There is also
[[http://github.com/relevance/labrepl][labrepl]] project that contains everything necessary for quick start.

There are several books about Clojure:
 - [[http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1934356336?ie=UTF8&tag=aleottshompag-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=1934356336][Programming Clojure]] -- first book on Clojure, that describes version 1.0 of the
   language and covers all necessary parts of it.  In the near future, the second edition
   will be released;
 - In May 2010th the book [[http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1430272317?ie=UTF8&tag=aleottshompag-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=1430272317][Practical Clojure. The Definitive Guide]] was released -- although
   it's called "Practical", it mostly provides succinct description of language with not
   so much examples. But it covers version 1.2 of language -- huge advantage over
   "Programming Clojure";
 - [[https://www.amazon.com/dp/1935182595/ref=as_li_ss_til?tag=aleottshompag-20&camp=0&creative=0&linkCode=as4&creativeASIN=1935182595&adid=0EN4M85RVZ6TQYX5EEFH&][Clojure in Action]] -- introduction to Clojure language for beginners;
 - [[https://www.amazon.com/dp/1935182641/ref=as_li_ss_til?tag=aleottshompag-20&camp=0&creative=0&linkCode=as4&creativeASIN=1935182641&adid=1F49V87XC9J4QWFXNKND&][Joy of Clojure. Thinking the Clojure Way]]-- book for people, who already know something
   about this language, but want to improve their skills;
 - in April 2012th, the O'Reilly will publish the [[http://www.amazon.com/dp/1449394701/ref=as_li_ss_til?tag=aleottshompag-20&camp=0&creative=0&linkCode=as4&creativeASIN=1449394701&adid=1ZZPN494JKRN0BEH8G63][Clojure Programming]] book that should
   provide good introduction to language and many its libraries.

I'm also collecting links to video-lectures & screencasts about Clojure.  You can find
them on [[./video][separate page]].

** Some articles about Clojure

I wrote several articles about Clojure (other notes about Clojure you can find in
[[http://alexott.blogspot.com/search/label/clojure][my blog]]):
 - [[./ClojureMaven][How to use Maven to build Clojure code]]
 - [[./ClojureLein][Using Leiningen to build  Clojure code]]
 - [[./ClojureHadoop][Programming  Hadoop with Clojure]]

I also wrote an introduction-level article (in Russian) for
[[http://fprog.ru/2010/issue4/][4th issue of Russian Magazine "Practice of Functional Programming"]] -- I plan to translate
it to English some time later.

