#title Yahoo! Chat Messenger

There are two implementations of *Yahoo! Chat* protocol for Emacs.  First of them called
[[http://www.nongnu.org/elgyach][El-Gyach]] and second is called [[http://users.starpower.net/marti1/yod.el.html][yod.el]], but *El-Gyach* has more features then *yod.el*, so i'll
describe it in more detail.

<contents>

* *El-Gyach*'s features
        
*El-Gyach* implements following features:

 - Spell checking;
 - Words highlighting;
 - Support of AES encryption;
 - Names, command and text completion;
 - Faces customisation;
 - Working with different accounts simultaneously;
 - Messages history;
 - Ability to ignore messages from some users;
 - Integration with other Emacs modules.

More detail information you can find on sites, dedicated to *El-Gyach* development.
        
* El-Gyach's installation
        
To install *El-Gyach* you need to download it from [[http://savannah.nongnu.org/projects/elgyach][site]], unpack sources and compile it (to
work with Yahoo servers, *El-Gyach* use module, written in ะก language). After compilation,
put following text in your Emacs initialisation file:

<src lang="elisp">
(add-to-list 'load-path "path_to_elgyach")
(autoload "gyach" "gyach" "Autoload for El-Gyach")
</src>

After loading the package, you can setup it with Emacs's customisation commands -- =M-x
customize-group gyach=. Here you can set username and password for your account, and also
you can setup name of =elgyach= programm, if it installed in non-standard place.

* Using the package
        
To run *El-Gyach* you need to do command =M-x gyach=, that create process buffer. You can also
use several *El-Gyach* processes simultaneously.  To do this, if you give prefix before run
this command, as here =C-u M-x gyach=.  But you cannot login to more then one chat room when
using same account -- this is restriction of *Yahoo! Chat*.

* *El-Gyach*'s commands
        
*El-Gyach* supports different commands, given in form =/commandname=.  Now
available following commands:
              
 - =/ignore User= and =/unignore User= -- to ignore messages from certain users, and to drop
   this ignoring;
 - =/highlight User= and =/unhighlight User= -- to highlight messages from certain users, and
   to drop this highlighting;
 - =/version= -- print out version number of *El-Gyach*.

* Customisation of *El-Gyach*
        
The main customisation parameters are username and password for *Yahoo! Chat* account.
These parameters are stored in variables =gyach-yahoo-username= and =gyach-yahoo-password=. To
make precise customisation of *El-Gyach* buffers you can use lisp code, that you can call
from =gyach-mode-hook=.

User can easily extend *El-Gyach*.  At each call for command, that looks like =/COMMAND=,
package will call function with name =gyach-custom-COMMAND=.  So you can write any new
functionality with small piece of code.

<div id="rule">[[./index][Back to main page]]</div>
