#title Emacs and interactive messaging tools

; * Introduction

Besides support of *non-interactive* messaging tools, such as E-Mail and Usenet news, Emacs
also has support for almost all interactive messaging tools:

 - Instant Messaging protocols.  This includes support for ICQ, Yahoo! Chat, AIM (AOL Instant
   Messaging), Jabber and MSN protocols;
 - Internet Relay Chat (IRC) protocol.

For each protocol, usially exists few implementations, that differs in degree of support
and functionality. Some of these implementations, already not supported, so I'll describe
only supported implementations, if their exists. 

IRC is very popular among Unix users, that often use Emacs, and this lead to creation of
several packages, implementing support for this protocol.  Now most powerful and actively
developed package is *Erc*, but there are also several alternative implementation -- *Zenirc*
& *Rcirc*.  *Zenirc* has many features, but almost not supported now (you can download it from
[[ftp://ftp.splode.com/pub/zenirc][ftp://ftp.splode.com/pub/zenirc]] if you want).  And *Rcirc* package implements simple IRC
client and included into GNU Emacs 22.

In this article I'll describe packages that provide support for:
 - Instant messaging protocols
  - [[./EmacsICQ][ICQ]]
  - [[./EmacsYahooChat][Yahoo! Chat]]
  - [[./EmacsAIM][AOL Instant Messaging (AIM)]]
;  - [[./EmacsJabber][Jabber]]
;  - [[./EmacsMSN][MSN]]
 - IRC protocol
;  - [[./EmacsErc][Erc]] -- very powerful IRC client
;  - [[./EmacsRcirc][rcirc]] -- simple IRC client 

;  LocalWords:  IRC LocalWords
