#title Using DVC with Emacs
#keywords emacs, dvc, version control, git, darcs, bazaar, mercurial, hg, monotone

<contents>

As distributed version control systems (DVCS) become widely used, Emacs also start to
support them.  To support concrete DVCS implementations separate Emacs packages was
created.  They implement commands, that closely reflect ideology of concrete system, and
often these packages use different key bindings and user interface, that match ideology of
DVCS.

As was mentioned earlier, in Emacs exists *VC* package, that was created to support
different version control systems (VCS) and provide uniform interface for all of them,
including some of DVCS.  *DVC* package has same goal as VC, but intended to support
distributed VCS.  Some of *DVC* code is based on the code from the *Xtla* package, and
developed by same developers.  You can get more information about *DVC* from [[http://download.gna.org/dvc/][project's site]].

* Architecture of DVC and supported systems

*DVC* has multilayer architecture.  At the top layer are functions, that provide automatic
version control system detection, and implement functions, common for all DVCS.  One layer
below, are defined functions, specific for concrete version control system.  And at the
lowest level, are defined functions, providing common framework for all supported DVCS.

Now, *DVC* support following version control systems:

|| name in *DVC* || name of VCS 
| xhg | mercurial (aka hg)
| xgit | git 
| baz | GNU Arch (tla) and Bazaar 1.x 
| bzr | Bazaar-NG 
| xmtn | Monotone 
| xdarcs | Darcs 

Not all supported VCS has full support in *DVC*.  You can find list of supported functions
for each of system on [[http://download.gna.org/dvc/][project's site]].

* Installation

Installation of package is quite simple -- you need to download archive from site, unpack
it and setup it with standard commands sequence:

<src lang="sh">
./configure
make
make install
</src>

To be able to use functions, provided by package, you need to add following lines to Emacs
initialization file:

<src lang="emacs-lisp">
(add-to-list 'load-path "path_to_installed_package")
(require 'dvc-autoloads)
</src>

that will perform registration of autoloads for parts of package, After executing these
commands, you can start to work with package, or perform initial customization of it (as
this described [[#dvc-customize][later]], but usually customization is not required, as package define
reasonable default values.

* Starting to work with package

User can work with *DVC* using common knowledge about commands of corresponding version
control system -- for all basic VCS's commands *DVC* provide corresponding functions, those
names started from =dvc-= prefix[1].

Main command, that will be usually used by user is =dvc-status= (it also available through
=C-x V s= keybinding).  During execution it creates buffer with a list of modified files,
that looks much like the buffer, created by package *PCL-CVS*.  Name of the buffer depends
from the name of used version control system and looks like =*VCS-status*=, where =VCS= will
replaced with name of backend for corresponding VCS (names of backends listed in table
above).

After getting buffer with repository's status, user can execute different operations in
it.  For this buffer will automatically set =dvc-diff= major mode, for which defined some
number of commands.  Interface and control keys for this mode very close to interface and
keys that used in *PCL-CVS* package, so if you had worked with it, then you can easily
switch to work with *DVC*[2].  Some operations also available for execution via menus.  *DVC*
add several menus -- =DVC-Diff=, =DVC-Buffers=, and dedicated menu for backend of concrete
VCS, that list commands specific for this backend. =DVC-Buffers= contain list of opened
buffers, related to *DVC* and could be used for work with these buffers. =DVC-Diff= menu could
be used for access to commands, common for all VCS -- getting changes, addition and
deletion of files, etc.

As in *PCL-CVS*, some commands could be executed not only for concrete files, but for group
of selected files.  For setting mark to file you can use =m= key, and for removing it -- =u=
key.  Besides this, you can use =backspace= key for removing mark from previous file.

Usually users use only limited set of operations -- look for made changes and commit or
revert them, add or remove files, look into change log, etc.  For all of these operations
*DVC* provide corresponding commands.

You can view content of a file with =dvc-diff-jump-to-change= function (key =RET=).  This
function opens the file and move cursor to first modified line.  Another function for
viewing source is =diff-goto-source= (=o= key or middle mouse button).  With the function
=dvc-dired-jump= (=C-x C-j=) you can also open *Dired* buffer and move to the selected file.

User can revert changes with the command =dvc-revert-files= (keys =U= or =C-x V f R=).  But
committing of changes could be done by one of two commands: =dvc-log-edit= or
=dvc-add-log-entry=. =dvc-log-edit= (key =c= or =C-x V c=) opens buffer in which you could enter
commit message, and after this, run function =dvc-log-edit-done= (it bind to keys =C-c C-c=)
to do actual commit.  Second command -- =dvc-add-log-entry= (=t= or =C-x V a=) differ from first
only in the style in which commit messages will presented (like entries in =ChangeLog=
files).  When you stay in status buffer you can also save changes as a file.  You can do
this with function =dvc-save-diff= (keybinding =W s=).

There are several functions, that could be used to view changes.  To view changes from the
=*VCS-status*= buffer you can use functions =dvc-diff-diff= (<code>=</code> key) and
=dvc-diff-ediff= (=e= key).  Second function differ from first only that it run *ediff* instead
of external *diff*.  To quickly switch between buffer containing diffs and corresponding
element in the status buffer, you could use function =dvc-diff-diff-or-list= (=j= key) -- it
works for both buffers.  And with function =dvc-diff-view-source= (=v= key) you can open
separate buffer with a file and view modified part of the file in this buffer.  To see
content of buffer with diffs without switching to it, you can use following functions --
=dvc-diff-scroll-down-or-diff= (<code>M-=</code>) and =dvc-diff-scroll-up-or-diff= (=M-RET=),
that scroll buffer with diffs up and down.

Besides these functions, exists 3 functions, that could be executed outside of
=*VCS-status*= buffer and has global key bindings.  =dvc-diff= function (bind to <code>C-x V
=</code>) display changes between current and previous state of repository.  =dvc-file-diff=
(=C-x V d=) and =dvc-file-ediff= (=C-x V e=) functions could be used to display changes for
concrete file, using buffer (with output of external *diff*) or *ediff*.

To see log of changes you can use several functions, that defined both for status buffer,
and globally.  The =dvc-log= (=L= or =C-x V L=) function show list of changes (in short form)
for file of project.  For current file in status buffer you can see change log with
function =dvc-diff-log= (=l= key).  Full change log you can see with function =dvc-changelog=
(=C-x V l=).  All these functions accept optional prefix parameter, that define how many
last changes you want to see (by default, these functions show all changes).

* Working with files

Users often perform operations with files -- add them, delete, etc.  *DVC* provide several
functions for these tasks -- =dvc-add-files= (=a= or =C-x V f a=) function add current (or
marked) file(s) to repository. To remove marked files from repository user can use
function =dvc-remove-files= (keys =d=, =r=, or =C-x V f D=).  There is also additional function
for removing files -- =dvc-purge-files= (=C-x V f X=), that remove files from disk without
leaving a backups.  As most of modern version control systems provide commands for
renaming files, so *DVC* also support this functionality with function =dvc-rename= (=C-x V f
M=).

To work with files, that already registered in VCS, but doesn't shown in status buffer,
you can use function =dvc-inventory= (=C-x V i=), that display list of files known by VCS.  In
this buffer user can use same commands and key bindings, as in the status buffer.

User can do some manipulations on list of objects (files and directories) in repository.
Usually, in each of VCS exists list of ignored files, that could be edited by user[3].
For quick manipulations with this list there are several functions.  =dvc-ignore-files= (=# i=
or just =i=) function put current (or marked) file(s) into list of ignored objects.
=dvc-ignore-file-extensions= (=# I= or =M-I=) function also modify this list, but put into it
not full file names, but only their extensions.  And if you want to modify this list other
way -- remove file from list, or add complex regular expression, then you can use function
=dvc-edit-ignore-files= (=# e=), that open buffer with list of ignored objects, and allow you
to edit it (please mention, that syntax of this file depends on used version control
system).

If you want to create new repository in current directory, you can use function =dvc-init=
(=C-x V I=) that will ask you about which DVCS you want use for it, and after that perform
corresponding command for initialization of repository.
    
* Branches and external repositories 

Work with different repositories and branches is very actual task for user of distributed
VCS, so *DVC* provide number of functions for performing these tasks.  For all supported VCS
exists common set of commands, providing basic functionality.  And, as *DVC* project is
successor of *Xtla* project, then for work with *GNU Arch* & *Bazaar* exists more functions --
bookmarks for repositories, etc.  Backends for other VCSs could also provide additional
functions, specific to concrete VCS.

Following commands are common for all supported DVCS:

|| Function  || Key binding || Description
| =dvc-missing= | =M m= or =C-x V m= | show changes in remote repository, not applied to current repository
| =dvc-merge= | =M M= or =C-x V M= | download and apply changes from remote repository 
| =dvc-pull= | =M f= | download changes from remote repository (not apply them)
| =dvc-update= | =M u= or =C-x V u= | apply downloaded changes 
| =dvc-submit-patch= | =C-x V p= | send changes to given e-mail address
| =dvc-bookmarks= | =C-x V b= | open buffer with bookmarks to remote repositories
| =dvc-clone= | =C-x V C= | clone repository from external one
| =dvc-create-branch= | =C-x V o c= | creates new branch
| =dvc-select-branch= | =C-x V o s= | switch to another branch
| =dvc-list-branches= | =C-x V o l= | show list of existing branches
; | == | == | 

Using these commands you can perform most of the tasks affecting other repositories.
  
* Other commands

To leave status buffer you can use function =dvc-buffer-quit= (=q= key).  And to update
content of status buffer (it doesn't performed automatically) you need to execute
=dvc-generic-refresh= (=g= key) function.

To get help on *DVC* usage you can use standard Emacs features -- when you are in status
buffer, press =C-h m= and you get description of current major and minor modes, together
with list of key bindings and names of corresponding commands.  List of global key
bindings you can get if you invoke =C-x V C-h=.  Besides this, package provide number of
tips, that you can open with =dvc-tips-next-tip= function, and than use =n= and =p= keys to
navigate between next and previous tip.

During it work *DVC* opens number of auxiliary buffers.  To make movement between them more
easy *DVC* define number of functions.  When you view several buffers with nested changes,
you can use =dvc-diff-master-buffer= (=^= key) function to move to the main buffer, containing
changes. For each buffer *DVC* set special variable, that points to the partner buffer, that
also used for perform same task.  This allow quickly switch between these buffers with
=dvc-buffer-pop-to-partner-buffer= (=h= key) function.

You can use same approach to view buffers used by *DVD* internally.  The
=dvc-open-internal-log-buffer= (=B L=) function opens buffer, that contain all commands,
executed by package.  And with =dvc-show-process-buffer= (=B p=) function you can see results
of execution of external commands, executed by package to perform all operations.

#dvc-customize
* Package customization

Package customization could be done with standard Emacs customization routines.
Corresponding customization group is called =dvc=.

Some modes, implemented by *DVC* provide to user ability to set buffer parameters from
hooks.  For example, the =dvc-status= function run =dvc-diff-mode-hook= (if it defined) after
it finish initialization of status buffer.

<div id="rule">[[./index][Back to main page]]</div>

Footnotes: 
[1] Besides this, each backend, implementing support for concrete VCS, define their own
    set of functions, corresponding to commands of given VCS.  For example, backend,
    implementing support for *Mercurial* define functions with prefix =xhg-=, and these
    functions could be directly used by user, if there are no corresponding functions with
    =dvc-= prefix.

[2] I want to mention that many commands also available outside the =*VCS-status*= buffer.
    To execute them you can add global prefix =C-x V= to their local key binding.  In this
    text I'll mark them as a *global*.

[3] User can also see ignored files if variable =dvc-status-display-ignored= will has
    non-=nil= value.

;  LocalWords:  Dired goto dvc changelog XTLA Xtla VCS's CVS PCL VCS autoloads
;  LocalWords:  ChangeLog keybinding hg NG
