#title Support of Monotone
#keywords monotone, emacs

<contents>

[[http://monotone.ca/][Monotone]] -- distributed version control system, using same concepts like other distributed
VCS, like *GNU Arch*, *Darcs* and other.  Work with *Monotone* from Emacs implemented by
*monotone.el* package, that come together with *Monotone* distribution.  There is also support
for *Monotone* in *DVC* package, that described in the section [[./EmacsDVC][Work with DVC]].

* Installation of monotone.el

You can find *monotone.el* in Monotone's distribution.  It located in =contrib= directory of
distribution. This package was tested with GNU Emacs 22.1, but it should works with other
Emacs's versions.  To work with it you need to place file to location, where Emacs find
it, and add following commands to initialization file:
    
<src lang="emacs-lisp">
(require 'monotone)
(monotone-set-vc-prefix-key "\C-xv")
(setq monotone-passwd-remember t)
</src>

First line of code loads package, second sets prefix for key bindings, and third -- force
package to remember passwords entered by user[1]

* Work with package

Commands, implemented by package, are accessible via menu, key bindings and by their
direct call via =M-x= (all implemented commands have prefix =monotone=).  By default prefix
for key bindings is not defined, so you need to set it during package initialization.
This could be done with =monotone-set-vc-prefix-key= function, and in the example above, it
set to =C-x v=, and in the text below, this prefix always will used.  All commands are
executed in the buffer called =*monotone*=.

Registration of file in repository is performed with =monotone-vc-register= command (=C-x v
i=).  You can commit changes with =monotone-vc-commit= command, that bound to =C-x v q= or =C-x
v C-q=.

Work with remote repositories is performed with following commands: the =monotone-pull=
command (=C-x v p=) -- fetches changes from server, the =monotone-push= command (=C-x v P=) --
push changes to server, and the =monotone-sync= command sync current repository with remote
one.

User can obtain list changes for file with =monotone-vc-diff= command, that bound to
<code>C-x v =</code>.  If you pass a numerical argument to this command, then changes will
shown for repository, instead of single file.

There are several commands to retrieve information about registered objects.  The main
command is =monotone-vc-status= (=C-x v s=), that outputs information about current branch.
With the =monotone-vc-print-log= command (=C-x v l=) you can obtain log for current file (and
if you give a numerical argument, then log will obtained for whole project).  You can also
retrieve identifier of current object with =monotone-grab-id= command (=C-x v 6=) -- this
command stores object's identifier in the kill ring, from which you can paste with
standard Emacs commands (for example, with =C-y=).

There is also one general purpose command -- =monotone= (it bound to =C-x v x=), that allows
to execute any command of *Monotone*, entered in the mini-buffer.

* Customization of package

You can customize package by setting some variables.  One of these variables, we already
used -- the =monotone-passwd-remember= variable, that caches passwords, entered by user.  If
this variable has non-=nil= value, then all passwords will be stored in
=monotone-passwd-alist= variable.  There is also =monotone-program= variable, that keeps name
of the Monotone's executable.

Address and remote server, and names of collections user can set in =monotone-server= and
=monotone-collection= variables.  Already used servers and collections are stored in
=monotone-server-hist= and =monotone-collection-hist= variables.

There are also other variables, that are usually not changed by user, but it's better to
know what information they keep.  If you set value of =monotone-cmd-show= variable to =t=,
then results of execution of *Monotone* commands will shown.  With
=monotone-program-args-always= variable you can set command-line options, that will always
passed to *Monotone*.  If variable =monotone-msg= has non-=nil= value, then all messages from
*monotone.el* will printed to the =*Messages*= buffer (this is very useful for debugging).

There are also two hooks, that allow to perform fine-grained customization --
=monotone-output-mode-hook= and =monotone-commit-mode-hook=.  First of them will called, when
data will printed, and second, when buffer for entering of commit messages will created.

<div id="rule">[[./index][To main page]]</div>

;  LocalWords:  el emacs contrib

Footnotes: 
[1] Passwords are stored only for the current sessions, and if you restart Emacs, then
    package will again ask you about passwords.

