#title BitKeeper's Support
#keywords emacs, bitkeeper

<contents>

*BitKeeper* is commercial implementation of version control system.  However, users can use
it for development of open source projects without any fee.  Most well-know project, that
had used *BitKeeper* was development of Linux kernel (but now it use *Git* for development).

Work with *BitKeeper* from Emacs is provided by *bk* package.

* Installation

To install *bk* package you need to download it from http://www.emacswiki.org/elisp/bk.el,
or obtain sources from *BitKeeper's* repository at =bk://bk-emacs.bkbits.net/emacs=.  This
source file you need to put to place, where Emacs can find it, and add loading of package
to the initialization file.  You also have to install *x-migrant* package, that is required
for work of *bk* package.

* Work with package

Work with *bk* package is similar to work with [[./EmacsVC][VC]].  Functions could be executed either via
=M-x= and name of function, global and local key bindings, or via =BitKeeper= menu, that
available when you work in *bk-mode*.

Package uses two prefix keys to work.  The =C-x v= prefix is used by *VC* package, so
functions from *bk* package overlap some of *VC* functions, that provides work with files.
The =C-c b= prefix is global, and used for functions, that could be applied not only to
files.  You need to remember, that only some functions available via global key bindings
(only with =C-x v= or =C-c b= prefixes).  All other functions available only when you work
with files, registered in *BitKeeper*.

When you work with files, that registered in *BitKeeper*, in status line you can see
information about license: *BKL,* when you use standard commercial license, and *BKCL*, when
you use community license.  To get more detailed information on licenses you can use =M-x
bk-help licensing=.

User can register new file in repository with =bk-register= function, that bound to =C-x v i=.
Work with already registered files is very similar to work with *VC* package.  Obtaining
file from repository for editing, and releasing of it after editing is performed with
=vc-toggle-read-only= function (=C-x C-q=).  With =vc-revert-buffer= function (=C-x v u=) you can
revert changes in file, and start to work with version from repository.

You can see information about concrete file's revision with =bk-print-revision-summary=
function (=C-x v l=).  To view revision history in a graphical form, you can execute
=bk-revtool= function (=C-c b r=), and it runs graphical revisions browser, that come in
*BitKeeper's* distribution.  User can also view concrete file's revision with =bk-print-rev=
function (=C-x v ~=), or display annotated file with =bk-annotate= function, that bound to =C-x
v g=.  To view files the =view-mode= is used.

Work with changes in *BitKeeper* is based on concept of changesets.  To support work with
changesets, the *bk* package defines several functions.  To make changes and create new
changeset exists =bk-citool= function, that bound to =C-c b c=.  This command runs graphical
utility from *BitKeeper's* distribution, that is used to commit changes to repository.

To exchange of changesets between repositories, *bk* defines two functions.  =bk-push=
function (=C-c b .=) is used to transfer changeset to the parent repository.  And =bk-pull=
function (=C-c b ,=) is used to retrieve new changesets from parent repository.  Both these
functions has global key bindings, so you can execute them from any place.

To get list of changes between your file and version in repository, user can use =bk-diffs=
function, that bound to <code>C-x v =</code>.  And to get changes for all files in
directory and subdirectories you can use =bk-recursive-diffs= function (<code>C-c b
=</code>).  There is also =bk-interesting-diffs= function (=C-c b i=) that recursively compare
files matched some condition -- files that are locked and modified by users, and also
files, that was added, but not yet committed to repository.  To display list of locked and
modified files (and also all added files) exists =bk-sfiles= function (=C-c b s=).

To get short description of package and main commands, user can use =bk-help-overview=
function (=C-c b h=).  User can also get help on *BitKeeper* with following functions: =bk-help=
(=C-c b m=) shows manual page for *BitKeeper*, =bk-apropos= (=C-c b a=) makes search in
*BitKeeper's* documentation, and =bk-helptool= function runs graphical help utility from
*BitKeeper's* distribution.

* Customization

User can use standard Emacs customization routines to change behaviour of package.  With
=M-x customize-group bk= function, user can set path to *BitKeeper's* executable files,
command line options, and prefixes for key bindings.

<div id="rule">[[./index][Back to main page]]</div>

;  LocalWords:  changesets changeset
