#title Internationalization, Localization & different languages in C/C++ programs
#keywords l10n, i18n

* Used terms

 Internationalization :: process of designing a software application so that it can be
   adapted to various languages and regions without engineering changes.

 Localization :: process of adapting software for a specific region or language by adding
   locale-specific components and translating text.

The distinction between internationalization and localization is subtle but
important. Internationalization is the adaptation of products for potential use virtually
everywhere, while localization is the addition of special features for use in a specific
locale. Internationalization is done once per product, while localization is done once for
each combination of product and locale. The processes are complementary, and must be
combined to lead to the objective of a system that works globally. Subjects unique to
localization include:

 - Language translation
 - National varieties of languages (see language localization)
 - Special support for certain languages such as East Asian languages
 - Local customs
 - Local content
 - Symbols
 - Order of sorting
 - Aesthetics
 - Cultural values and social context

But often in Internet you can read, that localization is process of translating texts to
given language, and internationalization is process of adapting software to use locale
settings.  And this mostly true, as with proper coding adaptation of software done only
once and can work with any locale, but language translation should be done for every language.

* One-byte & multi-byte encodings


* Languages support in C/C++


* Locale support in C/C++


* Implementation in Pinacolada

** Encoding conversions


** Localization

check what was already done

** Internationalization

possible implementation



* Links

 - http://www.i18nguy.com/
